# MSA_Wind_FootprintBias
Along the Atlantic coast of the United States, there is an immediate need to evaluate where, when, and how fishing occurs (i.e., fishing footprints). If we can confidently describe fishing footprints, we can assess impacts on fishing operations from other ocean uses, including offshore wind development. Ideally, we would build fishing footprints from data that captures the full extent of all fishing effort. Existing methods use Vessel Trip Reports (VTRs) because they are inclusive of regional fishing operations. However, VTRs represent entire trips with a single location, not the full spatial extent of trips. Therefore, we evaluated bias in VTR footprints using data collected by the Northeast Fisheries Science Center’s Study Fleet.

This dataset includes global positioning system (GPS) location data every minute throughout an entire trip, manually matched to the start and end locations of each haul to identify active fishing locations. Our pilot study included 221 trips, from 17 vessels, on trips from 2016 - 2019. Using this subset of data, we generated an ‘active fishing’ footprint by creating polygons for individual hauls and then merging all polygons within a trip.  We compare the active fishing footprints to the VTR footprints, using four confidence levels. Specifically, we take the log ratio of the two footprints to quantify size bias, we quantify overlap to assess spatial mismatch, and we allocate revenue to both fishing footprints to compare the economic implications of each method.

Merging data streams created a large hurdle for this project. To remove this hurdle and process data efficiently, we recommend creating a shared trip identifier among regional datasets. In this pilot study, we provide an approach to more accurately estimate fishing footprints, which could influence how we interpret lower-resolution data for the entire fleet in the context of offshore wind development. We found that the resolution of fishery dependent data could affect detection of spatially explicit changes in fishing behavior. Therefore, we recommend additional incentives for voluntary participation in programs that collect this fine scale data. Informed decisions depend on pre-construction data, so these incentives are time sensitive and should be prioritized to support multiple goals, including mitigation, compensation, and modifying plans for data collection.


### Disclaimer
This repository is a scientific product and is not official communication of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or the United States Department of Commerce. All NOAA GitHub project code is provided on an ‘as is’ basis and the user assumes responsibility for its use. Any claims against the Department of Commerce or Department of Commerce bureaus stemming from the use of this GitHub project will be governed by all applicable Federal law. Any reference to specific commercial products, processes, or services by service mark, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not constitute or imply their endorsement, recommendation or favoring by the Department of Commerce. The Department of Commerce seal and logo, or the seal and logo of a DOC bureau, shall not be used in any manner to imply endorsement of any commercial product or activity by DOC or the United States Government.
